---
title: "Lecture Series 2018"
description: "Lecture Series for the year 2018 at the Students' Math Club at Indian Statistical Institute, Bangalore."
summary: "7 Series | 15 Lectures | 7 Speakers"
---

## LS1807: Introduction to Hardy Spaces

Number of Talks: 1

- **Abstract:** We will start our discussion with some interplay between complex analysis and functional analysis. I will provide a very simple proof of "Cauchy Integral Formula" for analytic functions on closed unit disk, using the famous "Riesz Representation Theorem" from functional analysis. Then, we will move to introduction of Hardy spaces and its basic properties.
- **Speaker:** Dr. Muthukumar P. (Ph.D, 2019, ISI Chennai)
- **Pre-requisites:** Elementary complex analysis and elementary functional analysis.
- **Date and Time:** Saturday, 3rd November 2018, 3:00 PM
- **Venue:** G-26 Classroom, Academic Building

## LS1806: Algebraic Coding Theory

Number of Talks: 1

- **Abstract:** Communication channels and needs of coding -- block codes, linear and non-linear, basic ideas-- linear block codes, generator, parity check matrix, encoding decoding syndrome -- main coding theory problem-- explanation of main coding problem, discussion of basic bounds and mention of latest bounds found. If time is left, asymptotic bounds will be discussed here, followed by chapter on cyclic codes.
- **Speaker:** Shyambhu Mukherjee (B. Math, 2019)
- **References:**
  - _Introduction to Coding Theory_ -- Ron Roth
- **Pre-requisites:**
  - Linear algebra basics
  - Basic notion of fields and probability
  - You can read Introduction to Coding Theory by Ron Roth, to get a basic idea of what we would be dealing with.

## LS1805: Random Matrix Theory

Number of Talks: 5

- **Speaker:** S. Nanda Kishore Reddy (Ph.D)
- **Pre-requisites:**
  - Basic Linear Algebra
  - Probability I and II
  - Multivariate Calculus
- **Venue:** G-23 Classroom, Academic Building

##### Part 1

- **Title:** Jacobian computations in Random Matrix Theory
- **Abstract:** We shall discuss exact eigenvalue densities of certain random matrix ensembles.
- **Date and Time:** 22nd September (Saturday) & 23rd September (Sunday) 2018, 3:00 PM

##### Part 2

- **Title:** Law of Large numbers and Central limit theorem for eigenvalues and singular values for certain random matrix ensembles.
- **Abstract:** We extend the results of sums of i.i.d. random variables to products of random matrices.
- **Date and Time:** 29th September (Saturday), 6th October (Saturday) & 7th October (Sunday) 2018, 3:00 PM

## LS1804: Deep Learning with Natural Language Processing

Number of Talks: 2

- **Abstract:** Natural Language Processing is a recent topic which has emerged in the past decade. Natural Language Processing, abbreviated as NLP, is the application of computational techniques to the analysis and synthesis of natural language and hence helps machines "read" text by simulating the human ability to understand language. In these lectures we shall explore the architecture behind the machine learning algorithms used to train a model for processing human language. In the first lecture we will discuss about the older versions used for NLP like Skip-Gram and Bag-of-Words. In the second lecture we will see how the older techniques pave way for advanced tools like GloVe to process language.
- **Speaker:** Soumyabrata Kundu (B. Math, 2020)
- **Pre-requisites:** Basic Linear Algebra
- **Date and Time:** 1st September (Saturday) & 2nd September (Sunday) 2018, 3:00 PM
- **Venue:** G-23 Classroom, Academic Building

## LS1803: Classification of Root System

Number of Talks: 2

- **Abstract:** Root system is an algebraic combinatoric object which has always been in the hindsight of Lie Theory. It is widely recognized as a method to classify semi-simple Lie Algebras and Coxeter and reflection groups, as every semi-simple Lie algebra induces a root system. The main objects besides the root system in Euclidean spaces, are Weyl groups, Weyl chambers, and bases associated with the root system. In the first lecture I AM going to give proof of their relation which induces a construction of Coxeter-Dynkin diagram for irreducible root systems, after that it is a completely combinatoric argument which is going to classify the root systems; this would be discussed in the second lecture.
- **Speaker:** Sumit Kumar Singh (B. Math, 2020)
- **Pre-requisites:**
  - Basic Linear Algebra
  - Basic Group Theory (knowledge of group actions will be sufficient)
- **Date and Time:** 25th August (Friday) & 26th August (Saturday) 2018, 3:00 PM
- **Venue:** G-23 Classroom, Academic Building

## LS1802: Intuitive Introduction to Lie Groups

Number of Talks: 2

- **Abstract:** We will explore the basic properties of Lie Groups. The key idea is to study properties of certain groups by "localizing" them (here, the group we are interested in is the Lie Group and we localize them by associating Lie Algebra of the group). Our prototypical examples are (topologically) closed subgroups of . Then we will classify all the connected commutative Lie Groups. One of the important theorems in the beginning of this vast theory is Cartan’s theorem, which says that any closed subgroup of a Lie Group is also a Lie Group. If time permits, I will say a few words about group actions on manifolds.
- **Speaker:** Akshay Sateesh Hegde (B. Math, 2019)
- **Pre-requisites:**
  - Basic Linear ALgebra
  - Basic Multivariate Analysis
  - Some knowledge of manifolds will definitely help.
- **Date and Time:** 18th August (Friday) & 19th August (Saturday) 2018, 3:00 PM
- **Venue:** G-23 Classroom, Academic Building

## LS1801: Random walks, Markov Chains and Branching processes

Number of talks: 2

- **Abstract:** The concepts of random walks are trending these days. Researchers from diverse fields are trying to incorporate the structure of a random walk in their own area of research. We will try to understand random walks on integer lattices. We will also look at random walks on any connected graph. We will briefly look at Markov chains and try to understand the concepts of transient and recurrent states. We will also look at various examples of Markov Chains such as the Gambler’s Ruin problem and the Ehrenfest Model of diffusion. We will then talk about the Galton-Watson process which is a branching process. Recently one of my friends (Dwaipayan Basu of St. Xaviers Kolkata, department of microbiology) and I tried to model cancer using the Galton-Watson model. If time permits we will look at Branching Random walks (Prof. Parthanil Roy recently published a paper on that topic). If even further time is permitted I will talk about my ongoing work with my friend, about explaining protein folding using Markov Chains.
- **Speaker:** Suvadip Sana (B. Math, 2019)
- **Pre-requisites:** Basic Probability theory (mostly basics of conditional probability).
- **Further Note:** Main takeaway from this talk would be the idea of Random Walks and Markov Chains. Without any pre-requisites you can still get the ideas involved. As such, this talk is accessible to all.
- **Date and Time:** 11th August (Friday) & 12th August (Saturday) 2018, 3:00 PM
- **Venue:** G-23 Classroom, Academic Building
