---
title: "Special Lectures 2024"
description: "Special Lectures for the year 2024 at the Students' Math Club at Indian Statistical Institute, Bangalore."
summary: "3 Lectures | 2 Spring Lectures | 1 Fall Lecture | 3 Guests"
---

{{< katex >}}

{{< lead >}}
Fall 2024
{{< /lead >}}

## SL2403: Phase Transition for Symmetric Eulerian Elephant Random Walks on Lattices

- **Speaker:** Prof. Parthanil Roy (ISI, Bangalore)
- **Abstract:** In this talk, we shall investigate the asymptotic properties of a random walk with memory that exhibits Eulerian behaviour on lattices. Depending on the values of its parameters, we shall observe a nonlinear phase transition for these random walks from diffusive to superdiffusive regimes. This talk will be based on a joint work with Arijit Haldar and Subhrangshu Sekhar Manna.
- **References:** [TBU]
- **Date and Time:** Monday, 21st October 2024, 5:30 PM - 7:00 PM
- **Venue:** 2nd Floor Auditorium, Academic Building

---

{{< lead >}}
Spring 2024
{{</ lead >}}

## SL2402: Some elementary questions on tilings and homomorphisms and some non-elementary answers

- **Speaker:** Prof. Nishant Chandgotia (TIFR-CAM, Bangalore)
- **Abstract:** We will talk about tilings of \\(\mathbb{Z}^d\\) by rectangles and see how non-trivial questions in algebra and analysis appear out of nowhere while we try to answer them.
- **References:** [TBU]
- **Date and Time:** Saturday, 2nd March 2024, 3:00 PM - 5:00 PM
- **Venue:** 2nd Floor Auditorium, Academic Building

## SL2401: Gram matrices: connecting GPS triangulation, Euclidean metric embeddings, and Heron's formula

- **Speaker:** Prof. Apoorva Khare (IISc, Bangalore)
- **Abstract:** Given a finite metric space, when is it flat (i.e., embeds in a Euclidean space)? When is it spherical? What is the mathematics behind GPS? As we will prove in the talk, the answers to all of these questions involve only one idea: Gram matrices. Like Bond and Bourne, these too have numerous aliases: covariance matrices, positive semidefinite matrices, and modified Cayley-Menger matrices. After discussing these aliases and questions, we end with another application: the 2000-year-old formula of Heron, and its generalization to \\(2024\\)-dimensional triangles (or \\(n\\)-dimensional simplices).
- **References:** (See the notes)
- **Notes:** Available [here](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Czij-oDtWKpxjdLYDREuTye3azQz7OHF/view).
- **Video:** Available [here](https://youtu.be/eUBofwuY3Jo).
- **Date and Time:** Monday, 22nd January 2024, 5:00 PM - 7:00 PM
- **Venue:** 2nd Floor Auditorium, Academic Building
